[Infra] virtual machine template STP (#34)
RedHatQE/openshift-virtualization-tests-design-docs: stps/sig-infra/virtual-machine-template.md

#### **6. Known Limitations**

- v1alpha1 does **not** remove sensitive information (SSH host keys, machine-id, user data) from VMs before templating; users must do that before creating a template from an existing VM.
- Cross-namespace template-to-VM creation relies on current CDI workaround (e.g. SourceRef to DataSource in another namespace); subject to future KEP-3294/KEP-3766 behavior.
- OVA/OVF import/export is not in v1alpha1; no automated tests for import/export until that phase.
- Real-time guest quiescing and application-level sealing during template creation are out of scope for initial implementation.
- Per [VEP #76](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/blob/main/veps/sig-compute/76-vmtemplates/vmtemplate-proposal.md), extended `VirtualMachineTemplate` status maintained by watching PVCs, `VolumeSnapshots`, `DataSources`, and similar resources was dropped (cost and complexity at scale). Validation is instead performed at admission time when all required parameters have defaults: the admitter renders the `VirtualMachine` and rejects create/update if the result would be invalid.

---

> ### **III. Test Scenarios & Traceability**

Reviewer: Where would be the best place to define a Windows test case?
I would consider a restoring a VM from a template which depends on persistent data from vTPM and maybe even from efi as an interesting test case.

Author: Added windows case in this section

# OpenShift Virtualization Tests – Test Plan

## **Native Support for VM Templates – Quality Engineering Plan**

### **Metadata & Tracking**

> - **Enhancement(s):** [VEP #76: Native support for VM templates](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/issues/76) · [VEP #256: OCI artifact export for VMs and VM templates](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/issues/256)

Reviewer: Process question, not related to this specific PR: Would it be useful to link the merged proposal, e.g. https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/blob/main/veps/sig-compute/76-vmtemplates/vmtemplate-proposal.md ?

Reviewer 2: +1; missed that. yes please

Author: Added the proposal

> - **Feature Tracking:** https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNV-73392

Reviewer: Process question, not related to this specific PR: this links to an epic, not the feature. From my personal perspective it would be useful to have a PR in this repo to reflect an epic, but a Test Plan to reflect a feature.

Reviewer 2: from the template
`- **Feature Tracking:** [Link to the relevant feature in Jira]`
so yes, it should be

Author: Changed to the feature link

- **Epic Tracking:** [CNV-73392](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNV-73392)
- **Feature Maturity:**
  - DP: 4.21 - Deployed by manual installation
  - TP: 4.22 - Deployed by enabling a feature gate

>   - GA: 5.0 - Deployed by default

Reviewer 3: Upstream still in beta, do we consider that GA already?

Author: The feature gate is going to be enabled by default, I think from a user point of view from that point on it is GA

  - *Sign-off:* Ronen Sde-Or (ronen@redhat.com) / 01-06-2026

- **Template-from-VM anonymization is definition-only**
  - The product strips obvious unique identifiers (UUID, serial, MAC) from the captured definition only.
    Guest identity and secrets on disk can still carry into new VMs, so customers must prepare guests and disks before reuse to avoid conflicts, leakage, or compliance issues.
  - *Sign-off:* Ronen Sde-Or (ronen@redhat.com) / 01-06-2026

#### **3. Technology and Design Review**

- [x] **Developer Handoff/QE Kickoff**
  - *Key takeaways and concerns:*
    - During the Alpha stage the testing will be done using the virt-operator repository tests
    - Starting from Tech Preview openshift-virtualization-tests repository will be adding tests, with focus on feature gate/deployment while upgrading

- [x] **API Extensions**
  - *List new or modified APIs:*
    - New CRD - **VirtualMachineTemplate** and **VirtualMachineTemplateRequest**: manage templates, render a VM spec, create a VM from a template.

>     - New CLI binary — **`virtctl template`**: `process`, `convert`, `create` (CNV 4.22.0+).

Reviewer 3: Not a new binary but a new subcommand of virtctl

Author: Updated to sub-command

---

### **II. Software Test Plan (STP)**

#### **1. Scope of Testing**

> **Testing Goals**

Reviewer: Process comment: what is the relation to the epic, should the epic description be updated to the testing goals, or should the epic desciption just refer to this document?

Reviewer 2: in theory, these should be the same. in practice, having the jira ref this stp is enough as here are the signed and reviewed plans

Author: Added this to https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/CNV-91212

> - **[P0]** As a VM owner, I can create a runnable VM from a template backed by a boot source, with correct CPU, memory, disk, and boot configuration — using both declarative and CLI-driven flows.

Reviewer: @RoniKishner please raise in the epic refinement, that we might need a UI flow, too.

Author: Added in Epic refinement doc

- **[P0]** As a VM owner, I can capture a template from an existing VM and see clear success or failure; on success the template is reusable in the expected namespace.
- **[P0]** As a cluster admin, I can restrict which users may create or capture templates and which may create VMs from them.
- **[P1]** As a template owner, I can convert an OpenShift Template that contains a VM into a native VM template without losing customer-facing parameters.
- **[P1]** As a VM owner, templates honor sizing profiles and preferences so created VMs pick up the chosen shapes and defaults.
- **[P1]** As a Windows VM owner, I can build a Windows-oriented template and create a guest that boots with expected disks, network, and Windows-specific settings.
- **[P1]** As a cluster admin, templates and vm template requests survive cluster upgrade and remain usable afterward.
- **[P2]** As a VM owner, I can use a template from another namespace to create a VM where cross-namespace creation is supported.

> - **[P2]** As a cluster admin, when I disable and re-enable the Template capability, workflows are blocked while disabled and recover predictably after re-enable, which could lead to data loss of existing CustomResources.

Author: The potential outcome helps understand better the reason behind this goal, although not a must, it should be optional

**Out of Scope (Testing Scope Exclusions)**

- **Performance/scale testing**

>   - *Rationale:* No NFR targets defined for this release; can be added as P3 [in a later cycle](https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/CNV-86058).

Reviewer: Process comment: `later cycle` is relative. Being more explicit about the `current` release might be helpful here. For this reason, it is already very helpful to have the date. Maybe it could be extende to include also the release?

Reviewer 2: good point; this requirement is something that should be raised with PM as part of the work on the STP and have a clear decision (same as the UI).

the stp is not just something to fill in and forget about; this is where we keep ourselves honest with what we do and do not need

Author: Changed to define explicit version

  - *Sign-off:* [Dominik Holler / 1.5.2026]

- **Monitoring** — Does the feature require metrics and/or alerts?

>   - N/A for this release.

Reviewer: same Process comment: later cycle is relative. Being more explicit about the `this` release might be helpful here.

Author: Changed to define explicit version

**Integration & Compatibility**

- [x] **Compatibility Testing** — Ensures feature works across supported platforms, versions, and configurations
  - coexistence with existing OpenShift Template-based flows.

- [x] **Upgrade Testing** — Validates upgrade paths from previous versions, data migration, and configuration preservation
  - Upgrade with the Template capability enabled and existing templates plus vm template requests on the cluster.
  - Verify customer data is preserved and supported workflows still behave as documented after upgrade.

- [x] **Dependencies** — Blocked by deliverables from other components/products. Identify what we need from other teams before we can test.
  - N/A for this release.

- [x] **Cross Integrations** — Does the feature affect other features or require testing by other teams? Identify the impact we cause.
  - Affects common-templates under the UI team.

**Infrastructure**

- [x] **Cloud Testing** — Does the feature require multi-cloud platform testing? Consider cloud-specific features.
  - *Details:* N/A — same as the rest of OpenShift Virtualization.

> 

Author: `Test Strategy` are mentioned in the template stp as `test strategy considerations` so not all of them must be present.
This should be farther discussed in cross team meetings.

> 

Reviewer 2: @coderabbitai

> If the template STP lists testing types as considerations rather than mandatory entries, then requiring all of them to be present is incorrect.

this is wrong. the list must exist to make sure the test types were considered when desiging the tests.
they must all be present

@RoniKishner please do not add such statements before talking to me.

#### **3. Test Environment**

- **Cluster Topology:** Standard — Agnostic.

- **OCP & OpenShift Virtualization Version(s):** OCP 4.22 (and up) with OpenShift Virtualization 4.22 (and up).

- **CPU Virtualization:** N/A

- **Compute Resources:** Sufficient for VM creation and snapshot/clone operations.

- **Special Hardware:** N/A

- **Storage:** Storage type should support snapshot / cloning.

- **Network:** N/A

- **Required Operators:** OpenShift Virtualization installed through the supported operator path, with the Template customer capability enabled on the deployment.

> - **Platform:** N/A

Author: Since all platform are applicable, constantly updating the STP when a new platform is added should be avoided, as such N/A seems more appropriate since the platform has no effect on the feature

- [x] Test environment can be **set up and configured**, including the Template capability gate and healthy template component rollout.
- [x] Native VM template and template-from-VM capture workflows are available on the test cluster through supported interfaces.
- [x] Developer Handoff / QE Kickoff completed and untestable aspects agreed.
- [x] `virtctl template` commands (`process`, `convert`, `create`) for template processing, legacy conversion, and template-from-VM capture are available in the test build.

#### **5. Risks**

**Test Environment**

- **Risk:** Snapshot-enabled storage class behavior has not been validated yet for this feature, so test results may vary once snapshot-backed environments are exercised.
  - **Mitigation:** Add dedicated validation on a snapshot-capable storage class early in execution and expand coverage to include create/update/restore template flows to uncover storage-specific failures.
  - *Missing resources or infrastructure:* Confirmed snapshot storage class test coverage and known-issue baseline for snapshot-backed clusters.
  - *Sign-off:* Roni Kishner / 01-06-2026

---

### **III. Test Scenarios & Traceability**

> - **[CNV-73392]** — As a VM owner, I want to create a VM from an available boot source using a template

Reviewer: Process comment: If this would be a link to jira, it would be clear that this refers to a jira, and not a test id

Reviewer 2: @dominikholler with this process there are no more test IDs (for now we must have them only as part of the tests repo)

Reviewer: ok, thanks, makes sense. 
@rnetser are there plans to remove the test ids from the tests repo long term?

Reviewer 2: > ok, thanks, makes sense. @rnetser are there plans to remove the test ids from the tests repo long term?

yes; as part of the work on plans as code. will be the final stage there

  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 2] Validate admission behavior for invalid-by-default templates and acceptance behavior for valid templates under defaulted parameters.
  - *Priority:* P2

- **[CNV-73392]** — As a cluster admin, I want template workflows unavailable when the Template capability is disabled
  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 2] Validate capability-disable behavior that blocks new template workflows while preserving expected handling of existing objects.
  - *Priority:* P2

- **[CNV-73392]** — As a cluster admin, I want template workflows to recover after I re-enable the Template capability
  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 2] Validate disable-to-reenable recovery flow for template workflows and predictable handling of existing template-related objects.
  - *Priority:* P2

---

### **IV. Sign-off and Approval**

This Software Test Plan requires approval from the following stakeholders:

- **Reviewers:**
  - QE Members: [Geetika Kapoor](@geetikakay), [Michal Jankowski](@mijankow)
  - Team lead: [Dominik Holler](@dominikholler)
- **Approvers:**

>   - Dev Lead: Felix Matouschek (@0xFelix)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Dev Lead: [Felix Matouschek](@0xFelix)
```

Author: Changed

# OpenShift Virtualization Tests – Test Plan

## **Native Support for VM Templates – Quality Engineering Plan**

### **Metadata & Tracking**

- **Enhancement(s):** [VEP #76: Native support for VM templates](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/issues/76) · [VEP #256: OCI artifact export for VMs and VM templates](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/issues/256)
- **Feature Tracking:** https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNV-73392
- **Epic Tracking:** [CNV-73392](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNV-73392)
- **Feature Maturity:**
  - DP: 4.21 - Deployed by manual installation
  - TP: 4.22 - Deployed by enabling a feature gate

>   - GA: 5.0 - Deployed by default

Author: The example given is 
```
  - DP: N/A
  - TP: 4.22
  - GA: 5.0 
```
which seems to align to what I wrote + an addition explanation which is optional

# OpenShift Virtualization Tests – Test Plan

## **Native Support for VM Templates – Quality Engineering Plan**

### **Metadata & Tracking**

- **Enhancement(s):**
  - [VEP #76: Native support for VM templates](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/issues/76)
    — [merged proposal](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/blob/main/veps/sig-compute/76-vmtemplates/vmtemplate-proposal.md)
  - [VEP #256: OCI artifact export for VMs and VM templates](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/issues/256)
- **Feature Tracking:** [VIRTSTRAT-529](https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/VIRTSTRAT-529)
- **Epic Tracking:** [CNV-73392](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNV-73392)

> - **Feature Maturity:**

Reviewer 3: You link multiple VEPs, VEP256/Export is still TP and behind a FG in 5.0.

Author: Do you think we should remove it in here? 
The export VEP is mentioned in the - `Test Limitations` section, but I think it is a good thing to list all related issues in this part.

Reviewer 3: No we should keep it, I just wanted to point out this fact.

  - convert an existing VM manifest into a reusable template, create new VMs from templates, and control who may create or use templates and VMs.

- [x] **Understand Value**
  - Enables rapid, consistent VM deployment from in-cluster templates.
  - Allows templates to capture in-cluster and cluster-dependent resources, while instancetypes and preferences remain cluster-agnostic.
  - Reduces scripting and external tooling.
  - Aligns with traditional virtualization workflows for RH/OCP customers.

- [x] **Customer Use Cases**
  - **VM owner**
    - Create and share reusable templates from manifests or from an existing VM containing cluster-dependent resources.
    - Create VMs from templates and boot sources.
    - Use cross-namespace flows.
  - **Cluster admin**
    - Control who can view, add, and edit specific templates.
    - Control who can create VMs from approved templates.

- [x] **Testability**
  - The feature ships behind the KubeVirt **Template** feature gate. Enable the gate on tests.
  - A later OpenShift Virtualization / KubeVirt version is expected to include VM templates in the default deployment without the gate.

- [x] **Acceptance Criteria**

>   - A cluster administrator can enable the templates feature gate so that VM templates are available on the cluster (v4.22.0).

Reviewer 3: Add item for configurable that allows to disable it in >=5.0?

Author: Added

- [x] **Acceptance Criteria**
  - A cluster administrator can enable the templates feature gate so that VM templates are available on the cluster (v4.22.0).
  - A cluster user owner can create a VM from a native in-cluster template.
  - A cluster user can share the content of the templates between namespaces they control, so that a VM from namespace `A` is created on namespace `B`.
  - A cluster administrator can use namespace permissions so only intended users can manage VM templates or create VMs from them, and can restrict users so they may create VMs only from templates.
  - A cluster user can still create VMs from OpenShift Templates in the web console, VM templates are available alongside those options and do not remove or replace them.

- [x] **Non-Functional Requirements (NFRs)**
  - **Security:** Verify VM creation flows through templates do not by-pass namespace restriction.
  - *Note any NFRs not covered and why:*
    - UI: updated templates display is validated by the [UI team](https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/CNV-67254).
    - Documentation quality are not covered in this STP and are addressed in dedicated docs channels.

> 

Author: Monitoring, Performance and Scalability are mentioned in the `Out of Scope` section to prevent repeating them I didn't add them in the NFR 

While Observability can be also part of Monitoring

- **[P2]** As a cluster admin, when I disable and re-enable the Template capability, workflows are blocked while disabled and recover predictably after re-enable, which could lead to data loss of existing CustomResources.

**Out of Scope (Testing Scope Exclusions)**

- **Performance/scale testing**
  - *Rationale:* No NFR targets defined for this release; can be added as P3 [in a later cycle](https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/CNV-86058).
  - *PM/Lead Agreement:* [Dominik Holler] / 1.5.2026

- **Monitoring** — Does the feature require metrics and/or alerts?
  - N/A for this release.
  - *PM/Lead Agreement:* [Dominik Holler] / 1.5.2026

**Test Limitations**

- **OCI artifact export (VM and VM template packaging)**
  - *Rationale:* Portable export uses the OCI artifact format defined in VEP #256 (merged in [kubevirt/enhancements PR #257](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/pull/257)), delivery is gated and follows the OpenShift Virtualization roadmap—deferred beyond this feature's Tech Preview scope.
  - *PM/Lead Agreement:* [Dominik Holler] / 1.5.2026

> 

Author: Changed to the format

  - Affects common-templates under the UI team.

**Infrastructure**

- [x] **Cloud Testing** — Does the feature require multi-cloud platform testing? Consider cloud-specific features.
  - *Details:* N/A — same as the rest of OpenShift Virtualization.

#### **3. Test Environment**

- **Cluster Topology:** Standard — Agnostic.

- **OCP & OpenShift Virtualization Version(s):** OCP 4.22 (and up) with OpenShift Virtualization 4.22 (and up).

- **CPU Virtualization:** N/A

- **Compute Resources:** Sufficient for VM creation and snapshot/clone operations.

- **Special Hardware:** N/A

- **Storage:** Storage type should support snapshot / cloning.

- **Network:** N/A

- **Required Operators:** OpenShift Virtualization installed through the supported operator path, with the Template customer capability enabled on the deployment.

- **Platform:** N/A

- **Special Configurations:** Template capability gate turned on for the OpenShift Virtualization instance under test.

#### **3.1. Testing Tools & Frameworks**

- **Test Framework:** OpenShift-Virtualization-tests repo for tier 2 and 3, while virt-template repo for tier 1.

> - **CI/CD:** Dedicated lanes for virt-template tests.

Author: Added an explanation near the tier 3 in parentheses

- **OCI artifact export** – Packaging VMs and VM templates as OCI layouts for offline transfer or registry distribution ([VEP #256](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/issues/256))

---

### **Feature Overview**

Cluster administrators and VM owners get reusable **native VM templates**: save a VM design as a template, adjust parameters, and create matching VMs from the command line or automation the same way they manage other cluster resources.
Templates can be authored from manifests or captured from an existing VM.

---

### **I. Motivation and Requirements**

#### **1. Requirement & User Story**

- [x] **Review Requirements**
  - convert an existing VM manifest into a reusable template, create new VMs from templates, and control who may create or use templates and VMs.

- [x] **Understand Value**
  - Enables rapid, consistent VM deployment from in-cluster templates.
  - Allows templates to capture in-cluster and cluster-dependent resources, while instancetypes and preferences remain cluster-agnostic.
  - Reduces scripting and external tooling.
  - Aligns with traditional virtualization workflows for RH/OCP customers.

> 

Reviewer 4: i think "Undesratsnd value" should be done at VEP level and part of VEP finalization

Author: I agree, but we should do this on the template/stp.md file first and have a discussion about this.
At the current time this section is part of all the STP files and part of the template as well.

- [x] **Customer Use Cases**
  - **VM owner**
    - Create and share reusable templates from manifests or from an existing VM containing cluster-dependent resources.
    - Create VMs from templates and boot sources.
    - Use cross-namespace flows.
  - **Cluster admin**
    - Control who can view, add, and edit specific templates.

>     - Control who can create VMs from approved templates.

Reviewer 4: should this section be part of user stories?

Author: under which section in the file ?
it is under the `**Cluster admin**` section which seems to be the right place for me

**Out of Scope (Testing Scope Exclusions)**

- **Performance/scale testing**
  - *Rationale:* No NFR targets defined for this release; can be added as P3 [in a later cycle](https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/CNV-86058).
  - *PM/Lead Agreement:* [Dominik Holler] / 1.5.2026

**Test Limitations**

- **OCI artifact export (VM and VM template packaging)**
  - *Rationale:* Portable export uses the OCI artifact format defined in VEP #256 (merged in [kubevirt/enhancements PR #257](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/pull/257)), not OVA/OVF; delivery is gated and follows the OpenShift Virtualization roadmap—deferred beyond this feature's Tech Preview scope.
  - *PM/Lead Agreement:* [Dominik Holler] / 1.5.2026

- **Guest sealing / sensitive data removal from the disks**
  - *Rationale:* Explicitly out of scope for Tech Preview; defined as user responsibility before creating a template.
  - *PM/Lead Agreement:* [Dominik Holler] / 1.5.2026

#### **2. Test Strategy**

**Functional**

> - [x] **Functional Testing** — Validates that the feature works according to specified requirements and user stories

Reviewer 4: we talked about user stories in above section also. Can they be combined?

  - Core validation that customers can create, update, and remove native VM templates and template-from-VM capture requests through supported paths.

- [x] **Automation Testing** — Confirms test automation plan is in place for CI and regression coverage (all tests are expected to be automated)
  - Tech Preview: automated suites run against a full OpenShift Virtualization cluster.
  - Tech Preview: coverage for Template capability enabled, disabled, and toggled.
  - GA: upgrade-focused coverage at the agreed tier.

**Non-Functional**

- [ ] **Performance Testing** — Validates feature performance meets requirements (latency, throughput, resource usage)
  - Out of scope for this release (see Section II.1 Out of Scope).

- [ ] **Scale Testing** — Validates feature behavior under increased load and at production-like scale

>   - Out of scope for this release (see Section II.1 Out of Scope).

Reviewer 4: create tasks for scale team after checking with Daniel Gur.

Author: If we do it should be under the Epic of `vm templates GA` not at the current stage and under `vm templates TP`.
I strongly think we should wait for the GA Epic and update this STP as we move on.

>   - Out of scope for this release (see Section II.1 Out of Scope).

Reviewer 4: combine if same team is owner and create jira ?

- [x] **Security Testing** — Verifies security requirements, RBAC, authentication, authorization, and vulnerability scanning
  - RBAC for who may define templates and who may create VMs from them.
  - Cluster validation when customers request template-from-VM capture (who may start a capture and what is rejected).

- [x] **Monitoring** — Does the feature require metrics and/or alerts?

>   - N/A for this release.

Reviewer 4: " N/A for this release." --> if it's still a valid tests, maybe creating jira for future and routing to right team or own ourselves?

Author: This is for the `observability` team, and it would also require for the developers to implement the metrics logic first.
We can discuss about it as part of the feature development but it's not planned at the current time.

**Integration & Compatibility**

- [x] **Compatibility Testing** — Ensures feature works across supported platforms, versions, and configurations
  - coexistence with existing OpenShift Template-based flows.

- [x] **Upgrade Testing** — Validates upgrade paths from previous versions, data migration, and configuration preservation
  - Upgrade with the Template capability enabled and existing templates plus in-flight capture requests on the cluster.
  - Verify customer data is preserved and supported workflows still behave as documented after upgrade.

- [x] **Dependencies** — Blocked by deliverables from other components/products. Identify what we need from other teams before we can test.

>   - N/A for this release.

Reviewer 4: are there any real dependencies?

Author: Not that I can think of.

- [x] **Cross Integrations** — Does the feature affect other features or require testing by other teams? Identify the impact we cause.

>   - Affects common-templates under sig-virt and the UI team.

Reviewer 4: maybe good to mention cross team work in form of jira for quick tracking

Author: The UI team have an Epic under the feature Jira card - https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/CNV-67254
Do you want to create a Jira card to mention we should synch with UI team?

- **Special Hardware:** N/A

- **Storage:** Storage type should support snapshot / cloning.

- **Network:** N/A

- **Required Operators:** OpenShift Virtualization installed through the supported operator path, with the Template customer capability enabled on the deployment.

- **Platform:** N/A

- **Special Configurations:** Template capability gate turned on for the OpenShift Virtualization instance under test.

#### **3.1. Testing Tools & Frameworks**

- **Test Framework:** OpenShift-Virtualization-tests repo for tier 2 and 3, while virt-template repo for tier 1.

- **CI/CD:** Dedicated lanes for virt-template tests.

#### **4. Entry Criteria**

The following conditions must be met before testing can begin:

- [x] Requirements and design documents are **approved and merged**.
- [x] Test environment can be **set up and configured**, including the Template capability gate and healthy template component rollout.
- [x] Native VM template and template-from-VM capture workflows are available on the test cluster through supported interfaces.
- [x] Developer Handoff / QE Kickoff completed and untestable aspects agreed.

> - [x] `virttemplatectl` commands (`process`, `convert`, `create`) for template processing, legacy conversion, and template-from-VM capture are available in the test build.

Reviewer 4: is it virtctl template?

Author: You are correct it was changed 2 weeks ago

# OpenShift Virtualization Tests – Test Plan

## **Native Support for VM Templates – Quality Engineering Plan**

### **Metadata & Tracking**

> - **Enhancement(s):** [VEP #76: Native support for VM templates](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/blob/main/veps/sig-compute/76-vmtemplates/vmtemplate-proposal.md) · [VEP #256: OCI artifact export for VMs and VM templates](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/blob/main/veps/sig-compute/256-oci-export-proposal/oci-export-proposal.md)

Reviewer 3: Missing the beta graduation vep update? Should rather link to VEP tracker issues than individual files?

- **QE Owner(s):** Roni Kishner (rkishner@redhat.com)
- **Owning SIG:** sig-infra

**Document Conventions:**
- **Native VM template** – In-cluster reusable definition used to create new VMs with consistent shape and parameters.
- **Template-from-VM** – Workflow where an administrator or VM owner captures an existing VM as a reusable template.
- **OCI artifact export** – Packaging VMs and VM templates as OCI layouts for offline transfer or registry distribution ([VEP #256](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/blob/main/veps/sig-compute/256-oci-export-proposal/oci-export-proposal.md))

---

### **Feature Overview**

Cluster administrators and VM owners get reusable **native VM templates**: save a VM design as a template, adjust parameters, and create matching VMs from the command line or automation the same way they manage other cluster resources.
Templates can be authored from manifests or captured from an existing VM.

---

### **I. Motivation and Requirements**

#### **1. Requirement & User Story**

- [x] **Review Requirements**
  - convert an existing VM manifest into a reusable template, create new VMs from templates, and control who may create or use templates and VMs.

> - [x] **Understand Value**

Reviewer 3: Allows templates to capture in-cluster / cluster-dependent resources, while instancetypes and preferences are cluster-agnostic.

Author: Added the value

  - Enables rapid, consistent VM deployment from in-cluster templates.
  - Reduces scripting and external tooling.
  - Aligns with traditional virtualization workflows for RH/OCP customers.

- [x] **Customer Use Cases**
  - **VM owner**

>     - Create and share reusable templates from manifests or from an existing VM.

Reviewer 3: ... contanining cluster-dependent resources

    - Create VMs from templates and boot sources.
    - Use cross-namespace flows.
  - **Cluster admin**
    - Control who can view, add, and edit specific templates.
    - Control who can create VMs from approved templates.

- [x] **Testability**
  - The feature ships behind the KubeVirt **Template** feature gate. Enable the gate on tests.
  - A later OpenShift Virtualization / KubeVirt version is expected to include VM templates in the default deployment without the gate.

- [x] **Acceptance Criteria**

>   - A cluster administrator can enable the templates feature gate so that VM templates are available on the cluster.

Reviewer 3: Just for Alpha though, with Beta it should be enabled by default

  - A cluster user owner can create a VM from a native in-cluster template.

>   - A cluster user can share native in-cluster templates between namespaces they control.

Reviewer 3: How?

Author: Processing can target a template in another namespace if the user has RBAC there
`virtctl template process fedora-template -n shared-templates -p PASSWORD=secretpass`

Reviewer 3: But how do you conclude they are accessing from another namespace in this call? There's nothing to this command that makes it "access from another namespace"?

>   - A cluster administrator can use namespace permissions so only intended users can manage VM templates or create VMs from them.

Reviewer 3: Restrict users so they are able to only create VMs from templates

  - A cluster user can still create VMs from OpenShift Templates in the web console, VM templates are available alongside those options and do not remove or replace them.

- [x] **Non-Functional Requirements (NFRs)**

>   - **Security:** Verify template processing and VM creation flows do not pass Secrets or ConfigMaps unintentionally to created VMs.

Reviewer 3: How / why? I don't follow

Author: A user who instantiates a template gets a VM whose spec references Secrets/ConfigMaps they should not be able to use.

Reviewer 3: I'd argue about the term "unintentionally". Also, there is no guard against such cases. If a user defines a template refering to secrets, then that's what's going to happen.

  - **Performance/Scalability:** Verify a large quantity of VMs can be created from native VM templates without failures, excessive delays, or service instability.
    - *performance/scale validation is not in this plan* — see Section II.1 **Out of Scope** Performance/scale testing.
  - **Monitoring:** Verify no unexpected critical alerts are introduced during template processing and bulk VM creation workflows.
  - *Note any NFRs not covered and why:*
    - UI: updated templates display is validated by the [UI team](https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/CNV-67254).
    - Documentation quality are not covered in this STP and are addressed in dedicated docs channels.

#### **2. Known Limitations**

- **Templates expand instance types / preferences profiles into explicit fields**

>   - When a template references abstract profiles, the saved template stores the resolved fields directly rather than keeping the indirect reference. Customers therefore lose the benefit of reusing those shared definitions as live references.

Reviewer 3: abstract profiles?

  - *Sign-off:* Ronen Sde-Or (ronen@redhat.com) / 01-05-2027

> - **Template-from-VM does not preserve backing storage**

Reviewer 3: Might be a feature, IIRC there's also an epic tracking this work

Author: This is the current state of the feature, so I think it is right to keep it as a limitation.
Can you link the Epic, It would be helpful to add it as a link here

Reviewer 3: https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/CNV-79308
https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/CNV-85157

These are related

Author: Added a reference to the Tracked Jira

  - Capturing a template from an existing VM does not carry over backing storage details, so customers cannot rely on that path to preserve persistent vTPM or EFI settings from the source VM in the template today.
  - *Sign-off:* Ronen Sde-Or (ronen@redhat.com) / 01-05-2027

> - **Server-side “create VM from template” is same-namespace only**

Reviewer 3: Strictly speaking it might not have to, with the `create` subresource yes, when piping through `kubectl/oc create` it should work cross-namespace given the required RBAC.

  - *Sign-off:* Ronen Sde-Or (ronen@redhat.com) / 01-05-2027

- **Template-from-VM anonymization is definition-only**
  - The product strips obvious unique identifiers (UUID, serial, MAC) from the captured definition only.
    Guest identity and secrets on disk can still carry into new VMs, so customers must prepare guests and disks before reuse to avoid conflicts, leakage, or compliance issues.
  - *Sign-off:* Ronen Sde-Or (ronen@redhat.com) / 01-05-2027

#### **3. Technology and Design Review**

- [x] **Developer Handoff/QE Kickoff**
  - *Key takeaways and concerns:*
    - During the Alpha stage the testing will be done using the virt-operator repository tests
    - Starting from Tech Preview openshift-virtualization-tests repository will be adding tests, with focus on feature gate/deployment while upgrading

- [x] **API Extensions**
  - *List new or modified APIs:*
    - New CRD - **VirtualMachineTemplate** and **VirtualMachineTemplateRequest**: manage templates, render a VM spec, create a VM from a template.
    - New command - **`virtctl template`**: `process`, `convert`, `create` (CNV 4.22.0+).
  - *Testing impact:*

>     - Add new tests for template lifecycle, template-to-VM, VM-to-template, and `virtctl template`.

Reviewer 3: Not sure we should be adding test for virtctl?

Author: I will change it to be more general, not sure if the final version will use `virtctl`, `virttemplatectl`, or `kubectl virttemplate`. so lets make it more generic for now.

But we do have tests in virt-template repository, we should verify they are passing on an OpenShift cluster

---

### **II. Software Test Plan (STP)**

#### **1. Scope of Testing**

**Testing Goals**

- **[P0]** As a VM owner, I can create a runnable VM from a template backed by a boot source, with correct CPU, memory, disk, and boot configuration — using both declarative and CLI-driven flows.
- **[P0]** As a VM owner, I can capture a template from an existing VM and see clear success or failure; on success the template is reusable in the expected namespace.
- **[P0]** As a cluster admin, I can restrict which users may create or capture templates and which may create VMs from them.
- **[P1]** As a template owner, I can convert an OpenShift Template that contains a VM into a native VM template without losing customer-facing parameters.
- **[P1]** As a VM owner, templates honor sizing profiles and preferences so created VMs pick up the chosen shapes and defaults.
- **[P1]** As a Windows VM owner, I can build a Windows-oriented template and create a guest that boots with expected disks, network, and Windows-specific settings.
- **[P1]** As a cluster admin, templates and in-flight capture requests survive cluster upgrade and remain usable afterward.

> - **[P2]** As a VM owner, I can use a template from another namespace to create a VM where cross-namespace creation is supported.

Reviewer 3: Contradicts limitations?

Author: removed the limitation after discussion

> - **[P2]** As a cluster admin, when I disable and re-enable the Template capability, workflows are blocked while disabled and recover predictably after re-enable; the cluster rejects template definitions that would always produce an invalid VM.

Reviewer 3: There could be data-loss when removing the CRD definitions?

Author: Don't understand to what data you are referring to?

This in general talks about enable the feature gate, create a template, disable the feature gate, try to create a template (fail), and then re-enable it again to see the process works again.

Reviewer 3: Disabling the feature gate will lead to the CRDs being removed, which could lead to dataloss of existings CustomResources (VMT/VMTR) created from those CRDs. I guess that is somethings that needs to be added to what is the expected outcome of this action.

  - Upgrade with the Template capability enabled and existing templates plus in-flight capture requests on the cluster.
  - Verify customer data is preserved and supported workflows still behave as documented after upgrade.

- [x] **Dependencies** — Blocked by deliverables from other components/products. Identify what we need from other teams before we can test.
  - N/A for this release.

- [x] **Cross Integrations** — Does the feature affect other features or require testing by other teams? Identify the impact we cause.
  - Affects common-templates under sig-virt and the UI team.

**Infrastructure**

- [x] **Cloud Testing** — Does the feature require multi-cloud platform testing? Consider cloud-specific features.
  - *Details:* N/A — same as the rest of OpenShift Virtualization.

#### **3. Test Environment**

- **Cluster Topology:** Standard — Agnostic.

- **OCP & OpenShift Virtualization Version(s):** OCP 4.22 (and up) with OpenShift Virtualization 4.22 (and up).

- **CPU Virtualization:** N/A

- **Compute Resources:** Sufficient for VM creation and snapshot/clone operations.

- **Special Hardware:** N/A

> - **Storage:** Storage type is expected to be agnostic for template processing and VM creation outcomes in this plan.

Reviewer 3: Storage should support snapshotting / cloning properly though

- [x] Requirements and design documents are **approved and merged**.
- [x] Test environment can be **set up and configured**, including the Template capability gate and healthy template component rollout.
- [x] Native VM template and template-from-VM capture workflows are available on the test cluster through supported interfaces.
- [x] Developer Handoff / QE Kickoff completed and untestable aspects agreed.
- [x] CLI commands for template processing, legacy conversion, and template-from-VM capture are available in the test build.

#### **5. Risks**

**Test Environment**

- **Risk:** Snapshot-enabled storage class behavior has not been validated yet for this feature, so test results may vary once snapshot-backed environments are exercised.
  - **Mitigation:** Add dedicated validation on a snapshot-capable storage class early in execution and expand coverage to include create/update/restore template flows to uncover storage-specific failures.
  - *Missing resources or infrastructure:* Confirmed snapshot storage class test coverage and known-issue baseline for snapshot-backed clusters.
  - *Sign-off:* Roni Kishner / 01-05-2027

---

> ### **III. Test Scenarios & Traceability**

Reviewer 3: These duplicate what was written above?

Author: The `Testing Goals` should align to the `Test Scenarios`

- **Feature Maturity:**
  - TP: 4.22 - Deployed by enabling a feature gate
  - GA: 5.0 - Deployed by default
- **QE Owner(s):** Roni Kishner (rkishner@redhat.com)
- **Owning SIG:** sig-infra

**Document Conventions:**
- **Native VM template** – In-cluster reusable definition used to create new VMs with consistent shape and parameters.
- **Template-from-VM** – Workflow where an administrator or VM owner captures an existing VM as a reusable template.
- **OCI artifact export** – Packaging VMs and VM templates as OCI layouts for offline transfer or registry distribution ([VEP #256](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/blob/main/veps/sig-compute/256-oci-export-proposal/oci-export-proposal.md))

---

### **Feature Overview**

Cluster administrators and VM owners get reusable **native VM templates**: save a VM design as a template, adjust parameters, and create matching VMs from the command line or automation the same way they manage other cluster resources.
Templates can be authored from manifests or captured from an existing VM.

---

### **I. Motivation and Requirements**

#### **1. Requirement & User Story**

- [x] **Review Requirements**

>   - Native data source and existing-VM templating, cross-namespace creation, RBAC for template/VM creation.

Reviewer 2: please rephrase as requirements review summary
e.g
`capturing templates from existing VMs`
the requirement for each item is not clear

  - Aligns with traditional virtualization workflows for RH/OCP customers.

- [x] **Customer Use Cases**
  - **VM owner**
    - Create and share reusable templates from manifests or from an existing VM.
    - Create VMs from templates and boot sources.
    - Use cross-namespace flows.
  - **Cluster admin**
    - Control who can view, add, and edit specific templates.
    - Control who can create VMs from approved templates.

- [x] **Testability**
  - The feature ships behind the KubeVirt **Template** feature gate. Enable the gate on tests.
  - A later OpenShift Virtualization / KubeVirt version is expected to include VM templates in the default deployment without the gate.

- [x] **Acceptance Criteria**
  - A cluster administrator can enable the templates feature gate so that VM templates are available on the cluster.
  - A cluster user owner can create a VM from a native in-cluster template.
  - A cluster user can share native in-cluster templates between namespaces they control.
  - A cluster user can still create VMs from OpenShift Templates in the web console, VM templates are available alongside those options and do not remove or replace them.

> 

Reviewer 2: RBAC-related acceptance criteria is missing

Reviewer 3: +1

Author: isn't the point of `A cluster administrator can use namespace permissions so only intended users can manage VM templates or create VMs from them` the same as RBAC ?
Looking from an administration point of view I am not sure what you expect to be written?

Reviewer 2: this comment was added on a previous commit which did not have these acceptance criteria

- [x] **Non-Functional Requirements (NFRs)**
  - **Security:** Verify template processing and VM creation flows do not pass Secrets or ConfigMaps unintentionally to created VMs.

>   - **Performance/Scalability:** Verify a large quantity of VMs can be created from native VM templates without failures, excessive delays, or service instability.

Reviewer 2: the out of scope includes perf as something that will not be tested. please add a ref here to this section

  - **Monitoring:** Verify no unexpected critical alerts are introduced during template processing and bulk VM creation workflows.
  - *Note any NFRs not covered and why:*

>     - UI: updated templates display is validated by the UI team.

Reviewer 2: please add a link to the ui epic

    - Starting from Tech Preview openshift-virtualization-tests repository will be adding tests, with focus on feature gate/deployment while upgrading

- [x] **API Extensions**
  - *List new or modified APIs:*
    - New VM template workflows are available through cluster APIs: users can define reusable VM templates, render a VM manifest from a template, and create a VM directly from a template.
    - New VM-to-template workflow is available through cluster APIs: users can request creation of a reusable template from an existing VM.
    - New `virtctl template` commands are available in CNV 4.22.0+: `process`, `convert`, and `create`.
    - Cluster admins can enable or disable template workflows through a cluster-level feature toggle.
  - *Testing impact:*
    - New tests are required for template lifecycle flows, template-to-VM creation, VM-to-template creation, and `virtctl template` command behavior.
    - Feature-toggle tests are required to verify expected behavior when template workflows are enabled, disabled, and re-enabled.

- [x] **Version Expectations and Backporting**
  - **OpenShift Virtualization 4.21**

>     - `virt-operator` can be installed manually for early integration and developer-level validation.

Reviewer 2: why is this related to the stp? is the team planning on testing 4.21?

Author: Yes. there is already a running job for 4.21 - `test-virt-template-cnv-4.21`

Reviewer 3: why `virt-operator`? Did you mean `virt-template`?

Author: yes

  - **OpenShift Virtualization 4.22**
    - First release covered by this STP for native VM template workflows.
    - Core features are locked behind the Template feature gate.
    - Basic testing is focused on feature-gate enablement.
  - **OpenShift Virtualization 5.0**
    - Enable the Template feature gate by default.
    - Testing shifts to validating proper replacement of OpenShift Template-based VM workflows.
    - VM template OCI export is expected.
  - **Future release(s)**
    - OCI import for VM templates is expected in a later release cycle, following the VEP roadmap.
  - **Backporting approach for this feature**
    - New feature scope is delivered in new versions (for example, 4.22 -> 5.0), based on the VEP implementation roadmap.

>     - Backports to earlier versions are expected to be limited to selected high-priority fixes, not new user-facing capabilities.

Reviewer 2: there's already a section about feature maturity
and this describes a generic backport approach 
please keep the stp simple and remove anything that is not directly tied to the feature

---

### **II. Software Test Plan (STP)**

#### **SIG responsibilities**

- **sig-infra** — VirtualMachineTemplate and VirtualMachineTemplateRequest API behavior, and cluster operator deployment of the template feature when the Template feature gate is enabled.

> 

Reviewer 2: this can be dropped as the stp is only for the infra team (there are no other sigs involved - based on the metadata above)

- **[P1]** As a VM owner or admin, I can start template-from-VM capture from the CLI for a VM I manage; when the operation finishes, the new template is ready to process and to create VMs from.
- **[P1]** As a VM owner, templates honor sizing profiles and preferences so VMs created from the template pick up the chosen shapes and defaults.
- **[P1]** As a Windows VM owner, I can build a Windows-oriented template and create a new guest that boots with the expected disks, network, and Windows-specific settings.
- **[P1]** As a cluster admin, templates and in-flight capture requests survive cluster upgrade and remain usable afterward.
- **[P2]** As a VM owner, I can keep a template in one namespace and create a VM in another namespace where cross-namespace creation is supported (for example via rendered manifests applied with standard tooling).
- **[P2]** As a cluster admin, when required parameters have defaults, the cluster rejects template definitions that would always produce an invalid VM, while still accepting sound templates.
- **[P2]** As a cluster admin, when the Template capability is turned off, customers cannot start new template workflows until it is turned back on.

> - **[P2]** As a cluster admin, when I disable and re-enable the Template capability, existing templates and capture requests are handled predictably and supported workflows work again after re-enable.

Reviewer 2: testing goals should not be a 1-1 to test scnerios.
proposed consolidation (done by claude, please check):

```
   - **[P0]** As a VM owner, I can create a runnable VM from a template
     backed by a boot source, with correct CPU, memory, disk, and boot
     configuration — using both declarative and CLI-driven flows.
   - **[P0]** As a VM owner, I can capture a template from an existing VM
     and see clear success or failure; on success the template is reusable
     in the expected namespace.
   - **[P0]** As a cluster admin, I can restrict which users may create or
     capture templates and which may create VMs from them.
   - **[P1]** As a template owner, I can convert an OpenShift Template that
     contains a VM into a native VM template without losing customer-facing
     parameters.
   - **[P1]** As a VM owner, templates honor sizing profiles and preferences
     so created VMs pick up the chosen shapes and defaults.
   - **[P1]** As a Windows VM owner, I can build a Windows-oriented template
     and create a guest that boots with expected disks, network, and
     Windows-specific settings.
   - **[P1]** As a cluster admin, templates and in-flight capture requests
     survive cluster upgrade and remain usable afterward.
   - **[P2]** As a VM owner, I can use a template from another namespace to
     create a VM where cross-namespace creation is supported.
   - **[P2]** As a cluster admin, when I disable and re-enable the Template
     capability, workflows are blocked while disabled and recover
     predictably after re-enable; the cluster rejects template definitions
     that would always produce an invalid VM.

```

- [x] **Customer Use Cases**
  - VM owner: create VM from a template using a data source; create VM from template from existing VM; create VM from template in another namespace.
  - Cluster admin: RBAC to restrict VM creation to approved templates.

- [x] **Testability**
  - The feature ships behind the KubeVirt **Template** feature gate. Enable the gate on tests.
  - A later OpenShift Virtualization / KubeVirt version is expected to include VM templates in the default deployment without the gate.

- [x] **Acceptance Criteria**
  - VM owner can create a VM from a native in-cluster template.
  - VM owner can share native in-cluster templates between namespaces they control.
  - Deployment of virt-template (Template FeatureGate) is automated in CNV 4.22.
  - VirtualMachineTemplate (template.kubevirt.io) coexists with the existing OpenShift Template resource without conflicts (Console / CLI).

- [x] **Non-Functional Requirements (NFRs)**
  - Performance, Scalability, Monitoring.

#### **2. Known Limitations**

> - **VirtualMachineTemplates are flattened**

Reviewer 4: should we point to jira/tests for explaining impact of this limitation

Author: I do not think so:
1. I don’t see other STPs doing this
2. stories can change and be replaced dynamically, and I do not want to create a new PR every time such change occurs
3. we have no tests to link right now for those limitation.

Reviewer 4: not sure how will people going over STP knows real scenarios that could be seen due to this limitation.

Author: You are right. I added an explanation as to what is the user effect from those limitation.

  - A VirtualMachineTemplates including instanceTypes/Preferences will be flattened to include the instanceType/Preferences fields directly.
  - *Sign-off:* Felix Matouschek / 01-05-2027

- **Template-from-VM does not preserve backing storage**
  - When a template is created from an existing VM, backing storage for the VM is not carried into the template, so users cannot preserve persistent vTPM or EFI settings from that VM in the template today.
  - *Sign-off:* Felix Matouschek / 01-05-2027

- **Create-from-template subresource is same-namespace only**
  - Using the create subresource on a template, users can only create the new VM in the same namespace as the template.
  - *Sign-off:* Felix Matouschek / 01-05-2027

- **VM-to-template anonymization is definition-only**
  - Only basic preparation is applied: unique identifiers (UUID, serial, and MAC addresses) are removed from the VM definition in the template workflow, while disk contents are left unchanged.
  - *Sign-off:* Felix Matouschek / 01-05-2027

#### **3. Technology and Design Review**

> - [x] **Developer Handoff/QE Kickoff**

Reviewer 4: should we  explain what to expect in different versions 4.21,4.22 and future release. how backporting works for this feature. VEP does have but in terms of kubevirt versions and not what it mean to downstream

Author: Explained in `Feature Maturity` section

**Test Limitations**

- **None — reviewed and confirmed that no test limitations apply for this release.**
  - *Sign-off:* Roni Kishner / 2027-05-01

#### **2. Test Strategy**

**Functional**

- [x] **Functional Testing** — Validates that the feature works according to specified requirements and user stories
  - core validation of VirtualMachineTemplate and VirtualMachineTemplateRequest creation/update/deletion

- [x] **Automation Testing** — Confirms test automation plan is in place for CI and regression coverage (all tests are expected to be automated)
  - Tech preview required virt-operator repository on an OpenShift cluster testing
  - Tech preview require testing of enable/disable of the feature gate
  - GA require upgrade testing under tier 3

**Non-Functional**

- [x] **Performance Testing** — Validates feature performance meets requirements (latency, throughput, resource usage)
  - N/A for this release - https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/CNV-86058

- [x] **Scale Testing** — Validates feature behavior under increased load and at production-like scale
  - N/A for this release - https://redhat.atlassian.net/browse/CNV-86058

> 

Reviewer 4: maybe move to out of scope after getting ack from daniel gur

- [x] **Security Testing** — Verifies security requirements, RBAC, authentication, authorization, and vulnerability scanning
  - RBAC for template and VM creation.
  - admission policy for VirtualMachineTemplateRequest.

- [x] **CLI Testing** — Validates user experience and accessibility requirements
  - Validate `virtctl` command output and status conditions.

>   - align with downstream console/UI requirements where applicable.

Reviewer 4: would you like to split in shorter jira  stories and virtctl can go in tier1. I believe we have a tier1 lanes covering virtctl scenarios.

- **Feature Tracking:** https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNV-73392
- **Epic Tracking:** [CNV-73392](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNV-73392)
- **QE Owner(s):** Roni Kishner (rkishner@redhat.com)
- **Owning SIG:** sig-infra
- **Participating SIGs:** sig-compute

**Document Conventions:**
- **Native VM template** – In-cluster reusable definition used to create new VMs with consistent shape and parameters.
- **Template-from-VM** – Workflow where an administrator or VM owner captures an existing VM as a reusable template.
- **OCI artifact export** – Packaging VMs and VM templates as OCI layouts for offline transfer or registry distribution ([VEP #256](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/blob/main/veps/sig-compute/256-oci-export-proposal/oci-export-proposal.md)); out of scope for this STP's Tech Preview cycle.

---

### **Feature Overview**

Cluster administrators and VM owners get reusable **native VM templates**: save a VM design as a template, adjust parameters, and create matching VMs from the command line or automation the same way they manage other cluster resources.
Templates can be authored from manifests or captured from an existing VM.

> In OpenShift Virtualization 4.22 (Tech Preview), the feature is delivered by a feature gate.

Reviewer 2: please see [feature maturity](https://github.com/RedHatQE/openshift-virtualization-tests-design-docs/blob/main/stps/stp-template/stp.md?plain=1#L11)

> This plan covers end-to-end customer outcomes: creating and sharing templates, creating VMs from templates and boot sources, access control, rollout when the capability is enabled, CLI parity with supported flows, and behavior across upgrades.

Reviewer 2: to reduce duplications; this should be under `Customer Use Cases`

---

### **I. Motivation and Requirements**

#### **1. Requirement & User Story**

- [x] **Review Requirements**
  - Native data source and existing-VM templating, cross-namespace creation, RBAC for template/VM creation.

- [x] **Understand Value**

>   - Enables rapid, consistent VM deployment from in-cluster templates; reduces scripting and external tooling; aligns with traditional virtualization workflows for RH/OCP customers.

Reviewer 2: nit - for readability it will be nice to have list items

- [x] **Customer Use Cases**

>   - VM owner: create VM from a template using a data source; create VM from template from existing VM; create VM from template in another namespace.

Reviewer 2: ditto

  - Cluster admin: RBAC to restrict VM creation to approved templates.

- [x] **Testability**
  - The feature ships behind the KubeVirt **Template** feature gate. Enable the gate on tests.
  - A later OpenShift Virtualization / KubeVirt version is expected to include VM templates in the default deployment without the gate.

- [x] **Acceptance Criteria**
  - A VM owner can create a VM from a native in-cluster template.
  - A VM owner can share native in-cluster templates between namespaces they control.

>   - When the template feature gate is enabled, the cluster installs and runs the template components automatically in OpenShift Virtualization 4.22.

Reviewer 2: this is an implementation detail; what does it mean from a user perspective? how is it tramslated to an acceptance criteria in that aspect?

  - Deployment of virt-template (Template FeatureGate) is automated in CNV 4.22.
  - VirtualMachineTemplate (template.kubevirt.io) coexists with the existing OpenShift Template resource without conflicts (Console / CLI).

- [x] **Non-Functional Requirements (NFRs)**
  - Performance, Scalability, Monitoring.

#### **2. Known Limitations**

- **VirtualMachineTemplates are flattened**
  - A VirtualMachineTemplates including instanceTypes/Preferences will be flattened to include the instanceType/Preferences fields directly.

>   - *Sign-off:* Felix Matouschek / 01-05-2027

Reviewer 2: @RoniKishner please note that a signoff on limitations, out of scope etc must by done by PM

>   - Performance, Scalability, Monitoring.

Reviewer 2: please see https://github.com/RedHatQE/openshift-virtualization-tests-design-docs/blob/main/stps/stp-template/stp.md?plain=1#L81-L84
either an nfr is relevant and should be explained how it will be tested, or not relevant - needs to make sure the author addresses why the nfr is not needed

- [x] **API Extensions**
  - *List new or modified APIs:*
    - New VM template workflows are available through cluster APIs: users can define reusable VM templates, render a VM manifest from a template, and create a VM directly from a template.
    - New VM-to-template workflow is available through cluster APIs: users can request creation of a reusable template from an existing VM.
    - New `virtctl template` commands are available in CNV 4.22.0+: `process`, `convert`, and `create`.
    - Cluster admins can enable or disable template workflows through a cluster-level feature toggle.
  - *Testing impact:*
    - New tests are required for template lifecycle flows, template-to-VM creation, VM-to-template creation, and `virtctl template` command behavior.
    - Feature-toggle tests are required to verify expected behavior when template workflows are enabled, disabled, and re-enabled.

- [x] **Version Expectations and Backporting**
  - **OpenShift Virtualization 4.21**
    - `virt-operator` can be installed manually for early integration and developer-level validation.

>     - Native `VirtualMachineTemplate` and `VirtualMachineTemplateRequest` workflows are not expected to be available to general users in this release.

Reviewer 2: this info is not relevant in the scope of this doc; the doc is about the test plan for the feature

  - **Future release(s)**
    - OCI import for VM templates is expected in a later release cycle, following the VEP roadmap.
  - **Backporting approach for this feature**
    - New feature scope is delivered in new minor versions (for example, 4.22 -> 4.23), based on the VEP implementation roadmap.
    - Backports to earlier supported minors are expected to be limited to selected high-priority fixes, not new user-facing capabilities.

---

### **II. Software Test Plan (STP)**

#### **Participating SIG responsibilities**

This feature spans **sig-infra** (owning SIG) and **sig-compute** (participating SIG).

- **sig-infra** — VirtualMachineTemplate and VirtualMachineTemplateRequest API behavior, and cluster operator deployment of the template feature when the Template feature gate is enabled.

- **sig-compute** — Deprecation of legacy OpenShift Template-based VM flows and if needed replacement with native KubeVirt VirtualMachineTemplate-based flows.

- **New tests** — All new tests introduced for this feature are authored, reviewed, and owned by the **infra** team unless another team explicitly agrees to take ownership.

> #### **1. Scope of Testing**

Reviewer 2: please see the template - there are a lot of duplications.
(i.e no need for in scope and testing goals)

Author: Changed according to new template

- **[P0]** Verify golden-image template flow: VirtualMachineTemplate referencing a data source with namespace; process/create yields a VM with correct storage and boot.
- **[P0]** Verify RBAC: cluster admin can restrict users to create VMs only from approved templates; template owner and VM owner permissions as per VEP.
- **[P1]** Verify `virtctl template convert`: existing OpenShift Template (with VM object) converts to VirtualMachineTemplate; parameters are preserved.
- **[P1]** Verify `virtctl template create`: generates a VirtualMachineTemplateRequest from existing VM; async flow completes and template is ready for process/create.
- **[P1]** Verify `virtctl template` commands (CNV 4.22.0+): `process`, `convert`, and `create` behave correctly and match the feature specification.
- **[P2]** Verify cross-namespace: template in namespace A, VM creation in namespace B.
- **[P2]** Verify compatibility with common-templates-style templates.
- **[P2]** Verify admission-time validation (CNV 4.22.0): when all required parameters have defaults, submitting a VirtualMachineTemplate that would render an invalid VM is rejected; valid templates are still accepted.

> 

Author: Added such scenarios

- **[P1]** As a Windows VM owner, I can build a Windows-oriented template and create a new guest that boots with the expected disks, network, and Windows-specific settings.
- **[P1]** As a cluster admin, templates and in-flight capture requests survive cluster upgrade and remain usable afterward.
- **[P2]** As a VM owner, I can keep a template in one namespace and create a VM in another namespace where cross-namespace creation is supported (for example via rendered manifests applied with standard tooling).
- **[P2]** As a cluster admin, when required parameters have defaults, the cluster rejects template definitions that would always produce an invalid VM, while still accepting sound templates (OpenShift Virtualization 4.22).
- **[P2]** As a cluster admin, when the Template capability is turned off, customers cannot start new template workflows until it is turned back on.
- **[P2]** As a cluster admin, when I disable and re-enable the Template capability, existing templates and capture requests are handled predictably and supported workflows work again after re-enable.

**Out of Scope (Testing Scope Exclusions)**

- **OCI artifact export (VM and VM template packaging)**

>   - *Rationale:* Portable export uses the OCI artifact format defined in VEP #256 (merged in [kubevirt/enhancements PR #257](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/pull/257)), not OVA/OVF; delivery is gated and follows the OpenShift Virtualization roadmap—deferred beyond this feature's Tech Preview scope.

Reviewer 2: if i read this correctly, this is a feature limitation in terms of format is supported

  - *PM/Lead Agreement:* [Dominik Holler] / 1.5.2026

> - **Guest sealing / sensitive data removal from the disks**

Reviewer 2: same here - out of scope means - we can test y but **decided** not to because of x. product limitation - y is not supported
test limitation- y is supported but we **cannot** test it because of z

  - Upgrade with Template feature gate and existing templates/VMTRs present.
  - verify data preservation and API compatibility.

- [ ] **Dependencies** — Blocked by deliverables from other components/products. Identify what we need from other teams before we can test.
  - N/A for this release.

- [x] **Cross Integrations** — Does the feature affect other features or require testing by other teams? Identify the impact we cause.
  - Affects common-templates under sig-virt.

**Infrastructure**

- [ ] **Cloud Testing** — Does the feature require multi-cloud platform testing? Consider cloud-specific features.
  - *Details:* N/A — same as the rest of OpenShift Virtualization.

#### **3. Test Environment**

- **Cluster Topology:** Standard — Agnostic.

- **OCP & OpenShift Virtualization Version(s):** OCP 4.22 (and up) with OpenShift Virtualization 4.22 (and up).

- **CPU Virtualization:** N/A

- **Compute Resources:** Sufficient for VM creation and snapshot/clone operations.

- **Special Hardware:** N/A

- **Storage:** StorageClass supporting data volumes and snapshot clones.

- **Network:** N/A

- **Required Operators:** virt-operator (with Template feature gate enabled).

> - **Platform:** N/A

Author: As suggested in the guidelines it is ok to put N/A if it's function is not depended on the platform

>   - *Rationale:* Good to have at Tech Preview stage.

Reviewer 2: not sure what it means; will there be ui testing? is the ui team involved?

Author: We already have some, I removed any mention to UI

#### **5. Risks**

**Test Environment**

- **Risk:** Snapshot-enabled storage class behavior has not been validated yet for this feature, so test results may vary once snapshot-backed environments are exercised.
  - **Mitigation:** Add dedicated validation on a snapshot-capable storage class early in execution and expand coverage to include create/update/restore template flows to uncover storage-specific failures.
  - *Missing resources or infrastructure:* Confirmed snapshot storage class test coverage and known-issue baseline for snapshot-backed clusters.
  - *Sign-off:* Roni Kishner / 01-05-2027

**Other**

- **Risk:** Cross-SIG ownership boundaries can cause ambiguity in defect triage (infra vs compute), delaying issue resolution.
  - **Mitigation:** Use the documented SIG responsibility section as the source of truth and require triage owner assignment at bug filing time.
  - *Additional notes:* Revisit ownership mapping during each milestone review.
  - *Sign-off:* Roni Kishner / 01-05-2027

---

### **III. Test Scenarios & Traceability**

- **[CNV-73392]** — As a cluster admin, I want the cluster to roll out template support when I enable the Template capability

>   - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 1] Enable the Template capability; confirm template components are healthy; confirm customers can list and create templates through supported interfaces.

Reviewer 2: `confirm template components are healthy` - the test will run a user scenario that would fail if they are not healthy.
this is low level that should be ommitted from the stp

  - *Priority:* P0

- **[CNV-73392]** — As a VM owner, I want to create a VM from an available boot source using a template
  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 1] Author a template that references a namespaced boot source; supply parameters; create a VM; confirm the guest boots from the expected disk and storage layout.
  - *Priority:* P0

- **[CNV-73392]** — As a VM owner, I want to capture a reusable template from an existing VM I am allowed to manage

>   - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 1] Start capture for an existing VM; wait until the operation reports success or a clear failure; on success, process the new template and create a VM in an allowed namespace; confirm the new workload matches expectations.

Reviewer 2: scenarios should be high level description of the flow. not the test steps.

  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 2] Seed templates and capture requests before upgrade; upgrade the cluster; confirm templates still expand correctly and VMs can still be created from them.
  - *Priority:* P1

- **[CNV-73392]** — As a template author, I want the cluster to reject templates that would always produce an invalid VM when defaults fill required parameters (OpenShift Virtualization 4.22)
  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 2] With defaults in place, attempt to save a template that would always expand to an invalid VM; expect rejection. Confirm sound templates are still accepted.
  - *Priority:* P2

- **[CNV-73392]** — As a cluster admin, I want template workflows unavailable when the Template capability is disabled
  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 2] With existing templates and capture requests on the cluster, disable the Template capability; confirm customers cannot start new template processing, capture, or supported create flows until the capability is enabled again.
  - *Priority:* P2

- **[CNV-73392]** — As a cluster admin, I want template workflows to recover after I re-enable the Template capability

>   - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 2] Enable the capability and create baseline templates and capture requests; disable and re-enable the capability; confirm existing objects are handled predictably and supported workflows work again.

Reviewer 2: `confirm existing objects are handled predictably and supported workflows work again.` - this is low level
should be something like `create a new VM from a template successfully" ` - btw  - why is this tier2?

Author: This is about disabling and enabling the feature repeatedly

# OpenShift Virtualization Tests – Test Plan

## **Native Support For VirtualMachine Templates – Quality Engineering Plan**

### **Metadata & Tracking**

- **Enhancement(s):** [VEP #76: Native Support For VirtualMachine Templates](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/blob/main/veps/sig-compute/76-vmtemplates/vmtemplate-proposal.md)
- **Feature Tracking:** https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNV-73392
- **Epic Tracking:** [CNV-73392](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNV-73392)
- **QE Owner(s):** Roni Kishner (rkishner@redhat.com)
- **Owning SIG:** sig-infra
- **Participating SIGs:** sig-compute

**Document Conventions:**
- **VMT / VMTemplate** – VirtualMachineTemplate (CRD in `template.kubevirt.io`)
- **VMTR** – VirtualMachineTemplateRequest (CRD for creating a template from an existing VM)

> - **OVA/OVF** – Open Virtualization Appliance / Open Virtualization Format (import/export, v1beta1; target CNV 4.23.0)

Reviewer 3: A different format was chosen: OCI Artifacts

See https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/pull/257

- [x] **Understand Value**
  - Enables rapid, consistent VM deployment from in-cluster templates; reduces scripting and external tooling; aligns with traditional virtualization workflows for RH/OCP customers.

- [x] **Customer Use Cases**
  - VM owner: create VM from golden-image template; create VM from template from existing VM; create VM from template in another namespace.
  - Cluster admin: RBAC to restrict VM creation to approved templates.

- [x] **Testability**
  - The feature ships behind the KubeVirt **Template** feature gate. Enable the gate on tests.
  - A later OpenShift Virtualization / KubeVirt version is expected to include VM templates in the default deployment without the gate.

- [x] **Acceptance Criteria**
  - VM owner can create a VM from a native in-cluster template.
  - VM owner can share native in-cluster templates between namespaces they control.
  - Deployment of virt-template (Template FeatureGate) is automated in CNV 4.22.
  - VirtualMachineTemplate (template.kubevirt.io) coexists with the existing OpenShift Template resource without conflicts (Console / CLI).

- [x] **Non-Functional Requirements (NFRs)**
  - Performance, Scalability, Monitoring.

> #### **2. Known Limitations**

Reviewer 3: Two more limitations: 

1. The backend storage PVC is not preserved when creating a template from a VM -> it's not possible to carry over persistent vTPM or EFI settings from an existing VM to a template right now

2. When using the `create` subresource on a template, it's only possible to create a new VM in the same namespace as the template sits in

Reviewer 3: Another one:

Only basic sysprepping is done, i.e. unique identifiers (UUID, Serial and MAC addresses) are stripped from a VMs defintion, but the disks are left untouched.

Author: Added the limitations

The limitations are documented to ensure alignment between development, QA, and product teams.
The following are confirmed product constraints accepted before testing begins.

- **Cross-namespace template-to-VM creation relies on a CDI workaround**

>   - Uses a namespaced `SourceRef` reference to a golden image in another namespace; subject to future upstream Kubernetes behavior changes.

Reviewer 3: What does this limitation refer to? What limitation does this imply? What is subject to future Kubernetes changes?

  - *Sign-off:* Felix Matouschek / 01-05-2027

- **VirtualMachineTemplates are flattened**
  - A VirtualMachineTemplates including instanceTypes/Preferences will be flattened to include the instanceType/Preferences fields directly.
  - *Sign-off:* Felix Matouschek / 01-05-2027

#### **3. Technology and Design Review**

- [x] **Developer Handoff/QE Kickoff**
  - *Key takeaways and concerns:*
    - During the Alpha stage the testing will be done using the virt-operator repository tests
    - Starting from Tech Preview openshift-virtualization-tests repository will be adding tests, with focus on feature gate/deployment while upgrading

- [x] **Technology Challenges**
  - *List identified challenges:*
    - The feature is deployed by the cluster operator via a feature gate in 4.22.0, and plans to be deployed by default on 4.23.0+.
  - *Impact on testing approach:* All `virtctl template` and API tests run on **CNV 4.22.0+** clusters with the feature gate active.

- [x] **API Extensions**
  - *List new or modified APIs:*

>     - New `template.kubevirt.io/V1alpha` API group: VirtualMachineTemplate and VirtualMachineTemplateRequest resources.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    - New `template.kubevirt.io/v1alpha` API group: VirtualMachineTemplate and VirtualMachineTemplateRequest resources.
```

    - New `/process` subresource (server-side template rendering) and `/create` subresource (server-side VM creation) on VirtualMachineTemplate.
    - New `virtctl template` commands: `process`, `convert`, `create` (available in `virtctl` in CNV 4.22.0).
    - New `Template` feature gate in the KubeVirt cluster operator CRD.
  - *Testing impact:*

>     - New tests required for all new resource types, subresources, and CLI commands.

Reviewer 3: `virtctl template` shouldn't require too many functional tests. Unit tests should mostly suffice.

Author: This doc is also for unit tests (T1), so it is ok to keep it.

    - Tests involving CRD's and featureGates could be impacted.

> 

Author: Changed according to new template

  - N/A

---

### **II. Software Test Plan (STP)**

#### **Participating SIG responsibilities**

This feature spans **sig-infra** (owning SIG) and **sig-compute** (participating SIG). The following boundaries apply to development and QE ownership for testing and related work.

- **sig-infra** — VirtualMachineTemplate and VirtualMachineTemplateRequest API behavior; `virtctl template` commands (`process`, `convert`, `create`); cluster operator deployment of the template feature when the Template feature gate is enabled; tier 1 automated tests in the virt-template repository.

- **sig-compute** — Deprecation of legacy OpenShift Template-based VM flows and if needed replacement with native KubeVirt VirtualMachineTemplate-based flows.

- **New tests** — All new tests introduced for this feature are authored, reviewed, and owned by the **infra** team unless another team explicitly agrees to take ownership.

#### **1. Scope of Testing**

**In scope:**
- Functional validation of VirtualMachineTemplate and VirtualMachineTemplateRequest: parameter substitution, `/process` and `/create` subresource behavior, `virtctl template process`, `template convert`, and `template create`.

> - Creation of VMs from golden-image and from existing-VM templates.

Reviewer 3: What would you consider golden-images?

Author: Changed to `DataSource`

- **[P0]** Verify VM creation from template via the create subresource and via `virtctl template process ... | kubectl create -f -`; VM starts and is usable.
- **[P0]** Verify golden-image template flow: VirtualMachineTemplate referencing a data source with namespace; process/create yields a VM with correct storage and boot.
- **[P0]** Verify RBAC: cluster admin can restrict users to create VMs only from approved templates; template owner and VM owner permissions as per VEP.
- **[P1]** Verify `virtctl template convert`: existing OpenShift Template (with VM object) converts to VirtualMachineTemplate; parameters are preserved.
- **[P1]** Verify `virtctl template create`: generates a VirtualMachineTemplateRequest from existing VM; async flow completes and template is ready for process/create.
- **[P1]** Verify `virtctl template` commands (CNV 4.22.0+): `process`, `convert`, and `create` behave correctly and match the feature specification.
- **[P1]** Verify templates support instance types and preferences so created VMs from the template apply the selected fields.

> - **[P1]** Verify Windows VM owners can create a template and create a new runnable VM from this template.

Reviewer 3: What's different in a Windows VM compared to a Linux VM? This should be more specific about the enabled features on the VM.

- **[P1]** Verify VirtualMachineTemplates and VirtualMachineTemplateRequests are preserved across upgrade and remain usable after cluster upgrade.

> - **[P2]** Verify cross-namespace: template in namespace A, VM creation in namespace B.

Reviewer 3: Only through `kubectl create`, not with the subresource

> - **[P2]** Verify compatibility with common-templates-style templates.

Reviewer 3: I don't think we have to if we don't want to continue with the current style of common-templates. Also, what is different about them compared to other templates?

**Out of Scope (Testing Scope Exclusions)**

The following items are explicitly Out of Scope for this test cycle and represent intentional exclusions.
No verification activities will be performed for these items, and any related issues found will not be classified as defects for this release.

- **OVA/OVF import/export**
  - *Rationale:* Deferred to v1beta1 (CNV 4.23.0); not part of Tech Preview scope.
  - *PM/Lead Agreement:* [Dominik Holler] / 1.5.2026

- **Guest sealing / sensitive data removal from the disks**
  - *Rationale:* Explicitly out of scope for Tech Preview; defined as user responsibility before creating a template.
  - *PM/Lead Agreement:* [Dominik Holler] / 1.5.2026

- **Performance/scale benchmarks**
  - *Rationale:* No NFR targets defined for this release; can be added as P3 in a later cycle.
  - *PM/Lead Agreement:* [Dominik Holler] / 1.5.2026

- **UI testing**
  - *Rationale:* Good to have at Tech Preview stage.
  - *PM/Lead Agreement:* [Dominik Holler] / 1.5.2026

**Test Limitations**

- **None — reviewed and confirmed that no test limitations apply for this release.**

#### **2. Test Strategy**

**Functional**

> - [x] **Functional Testing** — Validates that the feature works according to specified requirements and user stories

Reviewer 3: We should avoid adding functional tests just for the sake of it. Did you check the existing unit tests in `virt-template`? We should only create the absolutely necessary amount of functional tests.

Author: Functional testing with a complete lifecycle of creation/deletion on an openshift cluster under a namespace is important, as it can cover issues not always seen in unit tests.

The phrasing might be confusing, I do not count all tier 1 tests as unit tests.
if we don't use a mock to create a VM, and the entire process is not just in the code, then we can count it as functional testing.

  - *Details:* Core template resources, subresources, `virtctl` commands, RBAC.

- [x] **Automation Testing** — Confirms test automation plan is in place for CI and regression coverage (all tests are expected to be automated)
  - *Details:* Required for GA per STP guide.

- [x] **Regression Testing** — Verifies that new changes do not break existing functionality
  - Smoke tests should pass without impact.
  -

**Non-Functional**

- [ ] **Performance Testing** — Validates feature performance meets requirements (latency, throughput, resource usage)
  - N/A for this release.

- [ ] **Scale Testing** — Validates feature behavior under increased load and at production-like scale
  - N/A for this release.

- [x] **Security Testing** — Verifies security requirements, RBAC, authentication, authorization, and vulnerability scanning
  - RBAC for template and VM creation.
  - admission policy for VirtualMachineTemplateRequest.

- [x] **Usability Testing** — Validates user experience and accessibility requirements
  - Validate `virtctl` command output and status conditions.

>   - align with downstream console/UI requirements where applicable.

Reviewer 3: Or align the console/UI to the way upstream works :)

Author: I am going to resolve this, we can discuss this on a meeting

- [x] **Upgrade Testing** — Validates upgrade paths from previous versions, data migration, and configuration preservation
  - Upgrade with Template feature gate and existing templates/VMTRs present.
  - verify data preservation and API compatibility.

- [ ] **Dependencies** — Blocked by deliverables from other components/products. Identify what we need from other teams before we can test.
  - N/A for this release.

- [x] **Cross Integrations** — Does the feature affect other features or require testing by other teams? Identify the impact we cause.
  - Affects common-templates under sig-virt and the UI team.

**Infrastructure**

- [ ] **Cloud Testing** — Does the feature require multi-cloud platform testing? Consider cloud-specific features.
  - *Details:* N/A — same as the rest of OpenShift Virtualization.

#### **3. Test Environment**

- **Cluster Topology:** Standard — Agnostic.

- **OCP & OpenShift Virtualization Version(s):** OCP 4.22 (and up) with OpenShift Virtualization 4.22 (and up).

- **CPU Virtualization:** N/A

- **Compute Resources:** Sufficient for VM creation and snapshot/clone operations.

- **Special Hardware:** N/A

> - **Storage:** Storage type is expected to be agnostic for template processing and VM creation outcomes in this plan.

Reviewer 3: There can be limitations in regards to snapshots, might need to verify that.

- **Network:** N/A

> - **Required Operators:** virt-operator (with Template feature gate enabled).

Reviewer 3: Which can be achieved through HCO?

- **Platform:** N/A

- **Special Configurations:** Template feature gate must be enabled in the KubeVirt CR.

#### **3.1. Testing Tools & Frameworks**

- **Test Framework:** OpenShift-Virtualization-tests repo for tier 2 and 3, while virt-template repo for tier 1.

- **CI/CD:** Dedicated lanes for virt-template tests.

#### **4. Entry Criteria**

The following conditions must be met before testing can begin:

- [x] Requirements and design documents are **approved and merged**.
- [x] Test environment can be **set up and configured**, including Template feature gate and feature deployment.
- [x] VirtualMachineTemplate and VirtualMachineTemplateRequest APIs are available in the test cluster.
- [x] Developer Handoff / QE Kickoff completed and untestable aspects agreed.
- [x] `virtctl template` commands available.

#### **5. Risks**

**Untestable Aspects**

> - **Risk:** During upgrade to a release where the feature gate becomes enabled by default, legacy OpenShift Templates should remain unaffected, but upgrade ordering may cause temporary gaps where some expected template-related resources are not deployed.

Reviewer 3: Not sure why it would? What gaps do you mean?

>   - **Mitigation:** Add upgrade-focused validation that confirms legacy OpenShift Template behavior is preserved and verifies required resources are present after the default-enable transition.

Reviewer 3: Why would an API group be affected by another API group? Is this meant to be checked on backend or UI level?

  - **Mitigation:** Keep dependency tracking in CNV-73392, rebase test lanes to latest validated builds, and gate scenario execution on dependency readiness.
  - *Dependency scope:* virt-template repo deliverables and compute-owned deprecation/replacement milestones.
  - *Sign-off:* Roni Kishner / 01-05-2027

**Other**

- **Risk:** Cross-SIG ownership boundaries can cause ambiguity in defect triage (infra vs compute), delaying issue resolution.
  - **Mitigation:** Use the documented SIG responsibility section as the source of truth and require triage owner assignment at bug filing time.
  - *Additional notes:* Revisit ownership mapping during each milestone review.
  - *Sign-off:* Roni Kishner / 01-05-2027

---

### **III. Test Scenarios & Traceability**

- **[CNV-73392]** — As a cluster admin, I want the cluster operator to deploy the template feature when the Template feature gate is enabled
  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 1] Enable Template feature gate; verify the feature API and controller are deployed; basic resource list/create succeeds.
  - *Priority:* P0

> - **[CNV-73392]** — As a VM owner, I want to create a VM from a golden-image template

Reviewer 3: I don't think we'll be shipping "golden-image" templates going forward

  - *Priority:* P0

- **[CNV-73392]** — As a template owner, I want to convert an OpenShift Template to a VirtualMachineTemplate via `virtctl template convert`
  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 1] Convert an OpenShift Template containing a VM object; verify parameters and VM spec are preserved in the resulting VirtualMachineTemplate.
  - *Priority:* P1

- **[CNV-73392]** — As a template owner, I want to create a VirtualMachineTemplateRequest from an existing VM via `virtctl template create`
  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 1] Run `virtctl template create` from an existing VM; verify the VirtualMachineTemplateRequest is created; wait for the controller to complete; process the template and create a VM.
  - *Priority:* P1

- **[CNV-73392]** — As a user, I want `virtctl` (CNV 4.22.0+) to expose `template process`, `template convert`, and `template create` for VM templates
  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 1] On a CNV 4.22.0 cluster, verify `virtctl template process`, `template convert`, and `template create` succeed and match expected results for the template feature.
  - *Priority:* P1

> - **[CNV-73392]** — As a VM owner, I want templates to support instance types and preferences

Reviewer 3: What about all other fields in a VM?

  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 1] Create a VirtualMachineTemplate with instance type and preference parameters; process and create a VM; verify sizing and preference are applied correctly.
  - *Priority:* P1

- **[CNV-73392]** — As a VM owner, I want to run a Windows guest from a dedicated Windows VirtualMachineTemplate
  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 1] Use a VirtualMachineTemplate built for Windows (dedicated image, parameters, and guest settings); process and create a VM; verify the Windows guest boots, disks and network are as defined, and the template’s Windows-specific values are applied.
  - *Priority:* P1

> - **[CNV-73392]** — As a VM owner, I want to create a VM from a template stored in a different namespace

Reviewer 3: Why is CDI a constraint?

  - *Test Scenario:* [Tier 1] Template in namespace A; process and create VM in namespace B (within current CDI constraints); verify VM and storage.
  - *Priority:* P2

> - **[CNV-73392]** — As a user, I want compatibility with common-templates-style templates

Reviewer 3: Why?

- **Feature Tracking:** https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNV-73392
- **Epic Tracking:** [CNV-73392](https://issues.redhat.com/browse/CNV-73392)
- **QE Owner(s):** Roni Kishner (rkishner@redhat.com)
- **Owning SIG:** sig-infra
- **Participating SIGs:** sig-compute

**Document Conventions:**
- **VMT / VMTemplate** – VirtualMachineTemplate (CRD in `template.kubevirt.io`)
- **VMTR** – VirtualMachineTemplateRequest (CRD for creating a template from an existing VM)
- **OVA/OVF** – Open Virtualization Appliance / Open Virtualization Format (import/export, v1beta1; target CNV 4.23.0)

---

### **Feature Overview**

This enhancement adds native in-cluster VM templating to KubeVirt, enabling users to create, share, and manage VM blueprints directly within the cluster.
Users can define reusable templates from golden images or from existing VMs, then deploy new VMs from those templates with customizable parameters—via CLI or server-side API.
A dedicated CLI command (`virtctl template`) supports template processing, conversion from existing OpenShift Templates, and template creation from running VMs.

> The feature targets alpha in CNV 4.22.0, when it will be deployed by the cluster operator under a feature gate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The feature targets Tech Preview in CNV 4.22.0, when it will be deployed by the cluster operator under a feature gate.
```

Testing must cover template lifecycle, parameter substitution, cross-namespace usage, RBAC, operator deployment, CLI integration, and upgrade behavior.

---

### **I. Motivation and Requirements**

#### **1. Requirement & User Story**

- [x] **Review Requirements**

>   - Native golden-image and existing-VM templating, cross-namespace creation, RBAC for template/VM creation, optional import/export (OVA/OVF).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Native golden-image and existing-VM templating, cross-namespace creation, RBAC for template/VM creation.
```

- [x] **Understand Value**
  - Enables rapid, consistent VM deployment from in-cluster templates; reduces scripting and external tooling; aligns with traditional virtualization workflows for RH/OCP customers.

- [x] **Customer Use Cases**
  - VM owner: create VM from golden-image template; create VM from template from existing VM; create VM from template in another namespace.

>   - Template owner: import/export cluster-wide templates.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

  - The feature ships behind the KubeVirt **Template** feature gate. Enable the gate on tests.
  - A later OpenShift Virtualization / KubeVirt version is expected to include VM templates in the default deployment without the gate.

- [x] **Acceptance Criteria**
  - VM owner can create a VM from a native in-cluster template.
  - VM owner can share native in-cluster templates between namespaces they control.
  - Deployment of virt-template (Template FeatureGate) is automated in CNV 4.22.
  - VirtualMachineTemplate (template.kubevirt.io) coexists with the existing OpenShift Template resource without conflicts (Console / CLI).

- [x] **Non-Functional Requirements (NFRs)**
  - Performance, Scalability, Monitoring.

#### **2. Known Limitations**

The limitations are documented to ensure alignment between development, QA, and product teams.
The following are confirmed product constraints accepted before testing begins.

- **v1alpha1 does not remove sensitive data (SSH host keys, machine-ID, user data) from VMs before templating**
  - Users must manually remove sensitive information from a VM before creating a template from it.
  - *Sign-off:* Felix Matouschek / 01-05-2027

> - **Cross-namespace template-to-VM creation relies on a CDI workaround**

Reviewer: This is not user visible, so is not relevant for the STP

Reviewer 3: +1

CDI does this for use, but a user does not need to know or care about it

Reviewer 3: Why is it even considered a limitation?

  - Uses a namespaced `SourceRef` reference to a golden image in another namespace; subject to future upstream Kubernetes behavior changes.
  - *Sign-off:* Felix Matouschek / 01-05-2027

> - **Exported VirtualMachineTemplates are flattened**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **VirtualMachineTemplates are flattened**
```

  - A VirtualMachineTemplates including instanceTypes/Preferences will be flattened to include the instanceType/Preferences fields directly.
  - *Sign-off:* Felix Matouschek / 01-05-2027

#### **3. Technology and Design Review**

- [x] **Developer Handoff/QE Kickoff**
  - *Key takeaways and concerns:*

>     - During the Alpha stage the testing will be done using the virt-operator repository tests

Reviewer: Wasn't this CNV 4.21? So not relevant anymore.

Author: It is but I think it's relevant to give general idea for future readers. in case they look at the tests in the 4.21 branch

Reviewer: Are there tests in the 4.21 branch? I would vote on focusing on finalizing 4.22 soon.

Author: The virt-operator repository tests do have a lane for 4.21

>     - Starting from Beta stage openshift-virtualization-tests repository will be adding tests, with focus on feature gate/deployment while upgrading

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Starting from TP stage openshift-virtualization-tests repository will be adding tests, with focus on feature gate/deployment while upgrading
```

- [x] **Technology Challenges**
  - *List identified challenges:*

>     - The feature is developed in a separate repository.

Reviewer: I do not understand, where is the challenge?

    - The feature is deployed by the cluster operator via a feature gate in 4.22.0, and plans to be deployed by default on 4.23.0+.

>   - *Impact on testing approach:* All `virtctl template` and API tests run on **CNV 4.22.0+** clusters with the feature gate active.

Reviewer: Does this line contribute to the content of the document?

Author: 1. Since it’s part of the STP template, I assume it’s required.
2. It may seem obvious to us, but others might see it as something that still needs to be explicitly stated.

Reviewer: Even if it is part of the template, let's challenge the template and try to improve it continuously. 
I am unsure about the abstraction level of this document. I would hope that we can have a smoother process if the abstraction level of this doc is high enough to avoid such details. Would be a STD a better place to care about the implementation , while this document could be focused on what we want to tests?

> - [x] **API Extensions**

Reviewer: Does this `API Extensions` paragraph provide any content to the document?

Author: Yes, there is a CRD test that might fail due to the added resources and also `OC` tests might have some impact.

Reviewer: So is the purpose to ensure that the tests listed below covers the new APIs?

Author: From my understanding it is to give information to all teams about the changes being done.
Maybe a better idea is to link the API section in the VEP ?

Reviewer 2: the point here is to list new or modified APIs and their impact on testing
(please see the template's hints for authors)

Reviewer 2: this comment was not addressed
e.g `Feature-toggle tests are required to verify expected behavior when template workflows are enabled, disabled, and re-enabled.` is not related to  this section and is already mentioned above

  - *List new or modified APIs:*
    - New `template.kubevirt.io/v1alpha1` API group: VirtualMachineTemplate and VirtualMachineTemplateRequest resources.
    - New `/process` subresource (server-side template rendering) and `/create` subresource (server-side VM creation) on VirtualMachineTemplate.
    - New `virtctl template` commands: `process`, `convert`, `create` (available in `virtctl` in CNV 4.22.0).
    - New `Template` feature gate in the KubeVirt cluster operator CRD.
  - *Testing impact:*
    - New tests required for all new resource types, subresources, and CLI commands.
    - Tests involving CRD's and featureGates could be impacted.

> - [x] **Test Environment Needs**

Reviewer: Can this paragraph be dropped without loosing content?

Author: not sure if this check-list is something required or we can completely remove it, changed this to N/A for now.

Reviewer: If it is not helpful for you, please drop it. If a reviewer would see a need, the reviewer could raise it.

  - *See environment requirements in Section II.3 and testing tools in Section II.3.1*

> - [x] **Topology Considerations**

Reviewer: Can this paragraph be dropped without loosing content?

  - *Describe topology requirements:* Standard cluster topology is sufficient; no multi-cluster or special network topology required.
  - *Impact on test design:* No architectural impact. Cross-namespace tests require two namespaces on a single cluster.

---

### **II. Software Test Plan (STP)**

> This STP serves as the **overall roadmap for testing**, detailing the scope, approach, resources, and schedule.

Reviewer: Can this line be dropped without loosing content?

#### **Participating SIG responsibilities**

This feature spans **sig-infra** (owning SIG) and **sig-compute** (participating SIG). The following boundaries apply to development and QE ownership for testing and related work.

- **sig-infra** — VirtualMachineTemplate and VirtualMachineTemplateRequest API behavior; `virtctl template` commands (`process`, `convert`, `create`); cluster operator deployment of the template feature when the Template feature gate is enabled; tier 1 automated tests in the virt-template repository.

> - **sig-compute** — Deprecation of legacy OpenShift Template-based VM flows and if needed replacement with native KubeVirt VirtualMachineTemplate-based flows.

Reviewer: Would it be useful to split the depreciation to a different PR to avoid slowing down this PR?

Author: I think compute needs to be aware we are moving to kubevirt templates, even if it will not be deprecated, it is important to raise awareness in case bugs will start showing

Reviewer: I am not convinced that this document is the right way to communicate this message.

Author: I get your concern, but I think we can always refine or adjust this later based on the compute team’s direction, but including it now helps avoid the change happening in isolation.

Reviewer 2: +1 to @dominikholler comment
the scope of this doc is not to raise awareness about changes in the product.
please remove and make sure that the information is shared.

- **New tests** — All new tests introduced for this feature are authored, reviewed, and owned by the **infra** team unless another team explicitly agrees to take ownership.

#### **1. Scope of Testing**

**In scope:**
- Functional validation of VirtualMachineTemplate and VirtualMachineTemplateRequest: parameter substitution, `/process` and `/create` subresource behavior, `virtctl template process`, `template convert`, and `template create`.
- Creation of VMs from golden-image and from existing-VM templates.
- Cross-namespace template usage.
- RBAC for template and VM creation.

> - Integration with instance types/preferences.

Reviewer: I do not understand

Author: Adding instance types and preferences fields to the template, from the openshift cluster deployed resources,  and making sure a VM is created as expected

Reviewer: Why are you more worried about instance types than about other features, e.g. configmaps?

Reviewer 3: The parametrization is tested extensively in unit tests.

Author: You are also right about configmaps and other resources, I will edit it to `Integration with other resources (instance types, configmaps, ...)

- Deployment of the feature by the cluster operator when the Template feature gate is enabled (CNV 4.22.0).

> - Import of template CLI commands into `virtctl` (CNV 4.22.0).

Reviewer: already covered by line 126

- **[P0]** Verify VirtualMachineTemplateRequest: create from existing VM; the controller creates a VM snapshot, clones storage to the target namespace, and creates a VirtualMachineTemplate; status reflects completion or failure.
- **[P0]** Verify VM creation from template via the create subresource and via `virtctl template process ... | kubectl create -f -`; VM starts and is usable.
- **[P0]** Verify golden-image template flow: VirtualMachineTemplate referencing a data source with namespace; process/create yields a VM with correct storage and boot.
- **[P0]** Verify RBAC: cluster admin can restrict users to create VMs only from approved templates; template owner and VM owner permissions as per VEP.
- **[P1]** Verify `virtctl template convert`: existing OpenShift Template (with VM object) converts to VirtualMachineTemplate; parameters are preserved.
- **[P1]** Verify `virtctl template create`: generates a VirtualMachineTemplateRequest from existing VM; async flow completes and template is ready for process/create.
- **[P1]** Verify `virtctl template` commands (CNV 4.22.0+): `process`, `convert`, and `create` behave correctly and match the feature specification.

> - **[P1]** Verify templates support instance types and preferences so created VMs reflect the selected sizing and preference behavior.

Reviewer: ?

> - **[P1]** Verify VM owners can create and run a VM from a Windows-focused VirtualMachineTemplate with expected guest configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **[P1]** Verify Windows VM owners can create a template and create a new runnable VM from this template.
```

- **[P2]** Verify cross-namespace: template in namespace A, VM creation in namespace B.
- **[P2]** Verify compatibility with common-templates-style templates.
- **[P2]** Verify admission-time validation (CNV 4.22.0): when all required parameters have defaults, submitting a VirtualMachineTemplate that would render an invalid VM is rejected; valid templates are still accepted.
- **[P2]** As a cluster admin, when the Template feature gate is disabled, template APIs and template workflows are unavailable for new operations.
- **[P2]** As a cluster admin, when I toggle the Template feature gate (enabled -> disabled -> enabled), existing templates and template requests are handled gracefully and workflows recover after re-enabling.

**Out of Scope (Testing Scope Exclusions)**

The following items are explicitly Out of Scope for this test cycle and represent intentional exclusions.
No verification activities will be performed for these items, and any related issues found will not be classified as defects for this release.

- **OVA/OVF import/export**
  - *Rationale:* Deferred to v1beta1 (CNV 4.23.0); not part of v1alpha1 scope.
  - *PM/Lead Agreement:* [Dominik Holler] / 1.5.2026

> - **Guest sealing / sensitive data removal**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Guest sealing / sensitive data removal from the disks**
```

  - *Rationale:* Explicitly out of scope for v1alpha1; defined as user responsibility before creating a template.
  - *PM/Lead Agreement:* [Dominik Holler] / 1.5.2026

- **Performance/scale benchmarks**
  - *Rationale:* No NFR targets defined for this release; can be added as P3 in a later cycle.
  - *PM/Lead Agreement:* [Dominik Holler] / 1.5.2026

- **UI testing**

>   - *Rationale:* Not required at Tech Preview / Alpha stage.

Reviewer: even not require, maybe good to have?

  - *PM/Lead Agreement:* [Dominik Holler] / 1.5.2026

**Test Limitations**

- **None — reviewed and confirmed that no test limitations apply for this release.**

#### **2. Test Strategy**

**Functional**

- [x] **Functional Testing** — Validates that the feature works according to specified requirements and user stories
  - *Details:* Core template resources, subresources, `virtctl` commands, RBAC.

- [x] **Automation Testing** — Confirms test automation plan is in place for CI and regression coverage (all tests are expected to be automated)
  - *Details:* Required for GA per STP guide.

> - [x] **Regression Testing** — Verifies that new changes do not break existing functionality

Reviewer: I do not understand the meaning

Author: Making sure that new API changes won't break some of the working functionality. 
For example you should still be able to edit an instance type even if it used by a template

Reviewer: No doubts that regression testing is important. I just do not understand in which way this line contributes value.

Reviewer 3: > For example you should still be able to edit an instance type even if it used by a template

Why would it? Do you test the same on VMs?

Author: > Why would it? Do you test the same on VMs?

Controller revision, namespace restricted resources and such might also have effect. I think it is important to check those in integration especially in early stages where there are big API changes

> No doubts that regression testing is important. I just do not understand in which way this line contributes value.

Lets remove it for now, if a reviewer will say it is missing I will bring it back.

  - Smoke tests should pass without impact.

**Non-Functional**

- [ ] **Performance Testing** — Validates feature performance meets requirements (latency, throughput, resource usage)

>   - N/A for this release.

Reviewer: Should we have an epic to track this?

Author: A story to follow for now

Reviewer: Would you mind linking it?

- [ ] **Scale Testing** — Validates feature behavior under increased load and at production-like scale

>   - N/A for this release.

Reviewer: Should we have an epic to track this?

Author: Can be the same story as `Performance`

Reviewer: Would you mind linking it?

- [x] **Security Testing** — Verifies security requirements, RBAC, authentication, authorization, and vulnerability scanning
  - RBAC for template and VM creation.
  - admission policy for VirtualMachineTemplateRequest.

> - [x] **Usability Testing** — Validates user experience and accessibility requirements

Reviewer: I do not understand

Author: Mainly user interaction tests such as command line / console

Reviewer: Makes sense, but I would call it "CLI testing"

  - Validate `virtctl` command output and status conditions.
  - align with downstream console/UI requirements where applicable.

- [ ] **Monitoring** — Does the feature require metrics and/or alerts?
  - N/A for this release.

**Integration & Compatibility**

- [x] **Compatibility Testing** — Ensures feature works across supported platforms, versions, and configurations
  - coexistence with existing OpenShift Template-based flows.

- [x] **Upgrade Testing** — Validates upgrade paths from previous versions, data migration, and configuration preservation
  - Upgrade with Template feature gate and existing templates/VMTRs present.
  - verify data preservation and API compatibility.

- [ ] **Dependencies** — Blocked by deliverables from other components/products. Identify what we need from other teams before we can test.
  - N/A for this release.

- [x] **Cross Integrations** — Does the feature affect other features or require testing by other teams? Identify the impact we cause.

>   - Affects common-templates under sig-virt.

Reviewer: Can we have this in a separate PR?

Author: It is important to raise awareness now, especially from the UI side.

Reviewer: I like to find ways to have a smoother review process because the PR is open already for two months. The idea is to limit the PR to a single team's scope.

  - *Details:* N/A — same as the rest of OpenShift Virtualization.

#### **3. Test Environment**

- **Cluster Topology:** Standard — Agnostic.

- **OCP & OpenShift Virtualization Version(s):** OCP 4.22 (and up) with OpenShift Virtualization 4.22 (and up).

- **CPU Virtualization:** N/A

- **Compute Resources:** Sufficient for VM creation and snapshot/clone operations.

- **Special Hardware:** N/A

- **Storage:** Storage type is expected to be agnostic for template processing and VM creation outcomes in this plan.

- **Network:** N/A

- **Required Operators:** virt-operator (with Template feature gate enabled).

- **Platform:** N/A

- **Special Configurations:** Template feature gate must be enabled in the KubeVirt CR.

#### **3.1. Testing Tools & Frameworks**

- **Test Framework:** OpenShift-Virtualization-tests repo for tier 2 and 3, while virt-template repo for tier 1.

- **CI/CD:** Dedicated lanes for virt-template tests.

#### **4. Entry Criteria**

The following conditions must be met before testing can begin:

- [x] Requirements and design documents are **approved and merged** (VEP #76 and any downstream OCP enhancement).

> - [ ] Test environment can be **set up and configured**, including Template feature gate and feature deployment.

Reviewer: What is the meaning of the checkboxes? Are they generic, or about specific test execution?

Author: generic

Reviewer: What does it mean if this checkbox is set or not set?

Author: It should have been set, changed it

- [ ] VirtualMachineTemplate and VirtualMachineTemplateRequest APIs are available in the test cluster.
- [ ] Developer Handoff / QE Kickoff completed and untestable aspects agreed.
- [ ] `virtctl template` commands available.

#### **5. Risks**

**Timeline/Schedule**

> - **Risk:** Feature spans a separate repository and cluster operator integration, test automation must be merged for GA.

Reviewer: The operator integration is done for some time now, can this  risk be dropped?

  - **Mitigation:** Prioritize P0/P1 scenarios, automate in parallel with feature maturity.
  - *Estimated impact on schedule:* Minor delay if cluster operator integration is late.
  - *Sign-off:* Roni Kishner / 01-05-2027

**Test Coverage**

> - **Risk:** Import/export and guest sealing are out of scope, cross-namespace testing is constrained by current CDI behavior.

Reviewer: no really a risk

  - **Mitigation:** Document limitations, test all in-scope flows thoroughly and trace all requirements to scenarios.
  - *Areas with reduced coverage:* OVA/OVF.
  - *Sign-off:* Roni Kishner / 01-05-2027

**Test Environment**

- **Risk:** Snapshot/clone and storage behavior may vary across storage backends.
  - **Mitigation:** Use supported storage backends; document any environment-specific restrictions.
  - *Missing resources or infrastructure:* None known at this stage.
  - *Sign-off:* Roni Kishner / 01-05-2027

**Untestable Aspects**

> - **Risk:** When both legacy OpenShift Templates and native KubeVirt templates exist in the same cluster, feature-gate transitions can create short-lived mixed states.

Reviewer: What could fail in the worst case?

  - **Mitigation:** Add explicit coexistence tests for gate enabled/disabled states, verify expected behavior boundaries for each template type.
  - *Untestable scope:* Exact timing and ordering of behavior during gate transitions when both template models are present concurrently.
  - *Sign-off:* Roni Kishner / 01-05-2027

**Dependencies**

> - **Risk:** Validation depends on upstream/downstream delivery timing for virt-template, virtctl command availability, and common-templates replacement behavior.

Reviewer: The feature is available  recent 4.22 builds

  - **Mitigation:** Keep dependency tracking in CNV-73392, rebase test lanes to latest validated builds, and gate scenario execution on dependency readiness.
  - *Dependency scope:* virt-template repo deliverables and compute-owned deprecation/replacement milestones.
  - *Sign-off:* Roni Kishner / 01-05-2027

**Other**

> - **Risk:** Cross-SIG ownership boundaries can cause ambiguity in defect triage (infra vs compute), delaying issue resolution.

Reviewer: Can be avoidded by limiting this PR on the infra part
